Waiting to see your friends coming through.
We're waiting to see which you come up with.
We've managed to sort of stay off a few,
but, um, couldn't get hold of Karen just so
we might just have just the chair.
Yes, well we certainly That's good.
Maybe. Yep. Oh,
Probably already here.
God, you call the short story.
Well, I think they're timeing me
so you'll be, you can do my
Side. Give you a moment to
catch your breath. Yeah, sorry I didn't
It's alright. It's, no, we're
running, we're running ahead of schedule,
so I certainly appreciate it.
Flexibility, uh, of you all to enable us to
commence slightly earlier with our scrutiny
of the board executive board to finishing up
somewhat ahead of schedule if possible.
Mm-Hmm. So obviously we've just had you in front
of US controller for the Customs Annual Review, uh,
and Mr had you earlier on as part
of the annual review process as well.
So welcome back. Um,
we welcome any initial comments you may wish to make
with regards to the board executive board
and then we'll open for Chris.
We have, uh, an hour set down for this if
I don't think you'll need It,
I suspect we may not Thank you,
But of course move to you sir.
Um, so it's an introductory remarks.
So the Border Executive Board does work together
as a departmental to address gaps in border processes
and the risks created by the movement of people of goods
and craft, whilst also having alignment across the agencies
when making improvements to the border system.
Whilst the border BB coordinates border activity,
each chief executive remains accountable for the performance
of their own agency
and we are supported by a very similar secretariat,
which the name the agencies fund.
And just to give you a little bit of context, uh,
what this means in, in,
in practice is the border executive board meet monthly
for about an hour and a half.
Uh, we usually fairly full agenda, but,
but that's what we're talking about.
We do work closely with border crown entities as well.
So Maritime, New Zealand Health, New Zealand, uh,
and aviation security and CAA.
Um, and of course we do work closely with aviation
and maritime private sector organizations, airports,
maritime pools, airlines and cruise operators.
BBS put a substantial effort into improving the air
passenger facilitation experience for last time,
particular focus on performance at Auckland Airport
as the main gateway to New Zealand.
Uh, we've talked about the New Zealand travel declaration,
so I think I can skip over that.
Um, but I think it is worth mentioning
and Rose Smith want me to that bio,
the biosecurity processing improvements have seen
the introduction of an express lane from New Zealand
and Australian passport for this
that is available at all intentionally now.
And biosecurity hosts are supporting passengers involving
create a positive atmosphere.
The express risk assessment,
which MPI is running now assesses passengers prior
to rather than after baggage collection
to speed up writing processing.
Uh, we've talked about the eGate,
so I don't need to cover that.
Um, but I think it is worth saying we are ready
to support facilitation of compliant passengers
and maintain border protection over the busy summer
20 24, 25 period, which is started.
Uh, we've talked about Wakata Regional Airport and um,
and of course we are also working
with Dunedin Airport on a pretty much the same timeframe
for them to resume international services.
Uh, they are significant pieces of work.
It is, there's no small matter
to set up an international I I, uh,
this is something we're having to do
on top of business as usual.
We're not funded for it.
So, um, we are strongly coordinating that.
We're trying to take a pragmatic view.
We're trying to ensure the costs set up are not unreasonable
and we are trying to make sure we will be sure
that we are ready to process passengers while still
appropriately managing water risk more.
Uh, the movement of goods continues to work well
with agencies delivering on their
perspective responsibilities.
And as chair, I'm very grateful for continued commitment
and speak from my colleagues.
And I think it's also worth saying our agencies are very
different in terms of the type of border services we deliver
and the extent to which the border is a part
about our world.
So the customs, the border is almost everything.
Oh, in fact the borders some capital
and for health the border really only from to time
and so we,
so just Yes,
Right. You're not
late. We have,
Thank you. We
still haven't scrutiny,
we still don't have the most important
one biosecurity in New Zealand
And he will not be here I'm afraid.
So. We'll, we'll do our best to fill in
because, and question.
That may be
Very good. Alright,
questions. Honor, genius, Lisa.
Thank you. And, uh,
thank you Christine for your presentation.
Can you just describe in a little bit more detail the types
of options that your board is considering, um,
to make the trans Tasman, um, travel easier between us
And our neighbor?
I certainly talk to that. Um,
you've heard quite a lot from me already about the
New Zealand Traveler declaration
and you've also heard me say that Australia doesn't have one
and it just, that just started this very small pilot.
Um, so that's actually a really important part of, of,
of getting the transman travel experience
to be more seamless, to have, uh, I think a digital rival.
Pardon both sides.
Another thing I would say is the Australians are also
looking at new smart gates.
Our smart gates are currently smarter than their smart
gates, so excellent. Not competitive,
But um, And uh, and uh, so,
and I've mentioned that we are, we are in the market now
for new Gates, but that's something
that the Australian system's also looking at.
So those are, those are some of the improvements.
Interestingly in the work we did
with our Australian colleagues way finding
for travelers is a perennial, um, uh, challenge.
I think, you know, airports are busy places.
There is a lot of signage about all the things you need
to do, not to mention all the duty free
and other things which, which are around the place.
And for people who travel regularly, it's probably fine,
but for people who are irregular travelers, um,
way finding can be difficult.
So that's something we are going to put,
we are putting more effort into trying to make that clear.
That can be a bit of challenge for their courts
because they're quite protective of the sort
of signage they have up.
Uh, so it's just a matter of finding ways
of putting signage in that uh,
they don't feel is encroaching all the things they want
to signs up about.
Thank you. Do you, um, share data as to, uh, interventions
that is, if it's for drug or biosecurity or immigration, um,
and then, you know, kind of build and share those profiles?
So we, we customs certainly do for any sorts of seizures
or child explosion, that sort of thing.
Certainly do for, um, things like irregular migration
and also trying to identify
where there could be trafficking of people.
For example. We share information, um,
that actually happens across, um, all the, um,
five eyes kind of countries.
Um, and uh, looking at the data with Australia,
Australia is always, uh, particularly interested in the flow
that might come through New Zealand.
So as we are, we've broken across the Pacific.
Thank you. I mean, you mentioned trafficking
and has been in the media of course the story
of Filipinos Yes.
Have come in. Um, so, so um, how,
how do you plug that knowledge back into the system
and do you make adjustments to ensure what you have learned,
you know, on a weekly basis is as, as adds
to the robustness of the system? Hmm.
So, um, when we talk about system, it's, um, partially
an information technology system,
but more than anything it's the kind of layers of defense,
um, to identify, uh, issues
where people are being trafficked.
And that primarily starts at the implication port where, uh,
for the majority of the ports that we have are vulnerability
of um, perhaps local arrangements.
Um, and we are trying to close that gap.
We will have airline liaison offices who work in conjunction
with the homes here in New Zealand to identify people
or groups of people that, um, potentially might uh,
be coming into New Zealand or for,
Um, Simone's a new question
and I just wanna talk a little bit about the risks
to our border and, um,
what you're seeing is being big risks.
I mean obviously we've got bird F here, not
by any water issues that you can do.
You can't help if birds migrate.
Um, but thinking about that, with that in mind,
thinking about potential, um, risks, whether it's to um,
you know, like Native Birds
or whether it's to a house, um, do you see,
have you got anything on your watch list currently
and what sort of trends and bits
and cases are you concerned about? Uh,
Not, not especially currently,
but we, one of the things we do try
to do is be prepared for what might come.
Mm-Hmm. So we, we have a bit of a watch list, um,
of particularly health, uh mm-Hmm.
Sort of pathogens around the world.
Uh, I think I get,
and the others may get a Friday report from the Ministry
of Health, which, um,
I've made them put a banner on which says,
because I, I used to get an open
and think, oh gosh, what's going to be on here?
But there is a banner that now says, um, there's nothing
to really worry about too much
Now you can read book forward.
So, but, but you all joking aside, um, the detail in
that be talking about measles in various countries,
it'll be talking about ox,
it'll be talking about things in Africa
where people are getting sort of
respiratory diseases and dying.
So it covers all of that,
but it makes some assessment just about how likely it's, um,
so that's just sort of an example of
what we're keeping a watch.
Okay. Um, NPI does this as well
and in fact the, uh,
the human health report is very much based on the NPI report
because they have constant intelligence running
around the world to see
what might be coming and what they're worried about.
So, uh,
and we do, uh, well with NPI,
we, uh, we haven't, we've sort of had a semi-live exercise.
Um, foot and mouth came into Indonesia.
Um, so we, while ago now,
but it was, uh,
something the border executive
board was paying a lot of attention to.
We were doing everything we could to support our colleagues
and NPI, they continue
to have the lead, they're accountable.
Mm-Hmm. But we sort of step in behind them and try to help.
So for example, in that instance, um, customs,
we put some additional questions onto the smart gates so
that if passengers were coming in, they would flag
and we will, we also,
'cause we get advanced passenger data, um, we're able
to some extent to see who had been Indonesia.
So using intra decoration, she helps with that too.
So that was a live example of
where we were lined up with health.
Um, we more recently have done a desktop exercise on, uh,
say, uh, epidemic came here.
Mm-Hmm. Again, agencies do how would stand up?
And again, NCTD is a really useful, uh, tool in that
because, uh, 'cause you have to declare where you've been.
We can um, certainly put,
put alert on actually if a passenger's been in a country
where measles is is right then um, it's not
that they would be stopped from coming here, probably not.
But it's more likely health special would be possibly
to just talk as they came in, that sort of thing.
Any questions?
Dam Connor? Uh, look, can I just ask on behalf of, um,
biosecurity in New Zealand,
ha has the group considered banning the importation of food?
We have certainly discussed it
And, and it might be an NTB,
some might consider it might be culturally inappropriate
or whatever, but it is a very high risk pathway.
Yes. No, and
and the direct bread flyer is, is incredibly expensive.
No, the director general has been very, uh,
seems this very energetic on it.
Yeah. Uh, is I,
I feel so why have you stopped him? We,
We haven't. Oh, we haven't
wet I feel awkward talking
about this when he's not in the room.
I know. Sorry, being string but, uh, he
Sorry, was he expected to join you this?
No, he was not until pre um, could I just put it this way,
work is still, work is still underway.
Consideration still being given to possibly not a total ban
all food, but more, many more restrictions.
I mean, you know, if to keep it simple, it would be,
it would help everyone.
And, and I appreciate going back to mfa.
I guess the issues particularly around the Pacific
and some of the cultural issues there, while appreciating
that it's still a very high risk pathway for what is
probably a relatively small benefit. We,
We would agree very strongly.
And actually Carolyn Ray
and I met with the chief executive New Zealand recently.
We had a discussion about this very point.
So it is still a live, um, point of point
of policy discussion, if I can put it that way.
Look, personally I would ban food,
but there, but there are considerations.
So think else is looking slightly,
slightly qu Can I stop on that?
On that note, does the BEB give any advice
or direction in ministers on these kind of things?
Uh, as I said, each chief executive
of an agency remains accountable for,
they're accountable, not as a group.
But what we do is we, we are in behind supporting,
we're certainly briefing our ministers and support.
So
Yeah, I guess the question that ultimately it has
to be taken in a broader context, right?
Sure, yeah. If you wanna get rid of risk,
then close the borders and pull bank over
head and hide at the bottom of the world.
But actually that's not sustainable
Long term. It's a successful
economy. Well it's, it's a not funny thing
but um, Mr.
O'Connell will know very well that um, uh,
and actually I get this quite a bit.
You know, people saying to me, ah, you know,
I've stuck in customs
and you know, then your dog picked up my apple
and I just usually runs it now.
'cause that's easier to explain that
that wasn't customs, it was security.
But, but because we are, we're we
Always blame customs.
Indeed. So, uh, it's a shared, it's it is.
It's shared, you know, and it doesn't, it doesn't,
passengers shouldn't have to distinguish
between which agency, you know, we are the border.
Mm-Hmm. So, um, sorry I completely lost my train.
Some of it was, sorry was what,
what was I trying to finish on?
That was we had the breakfast
had a brilliant thing I was about to say.
Oh that's right. Passengers, passengers do not like queuing
and generally speaking it's pretty quick
through customs these days because we have smart gate
and we have, we have script numbers
and generally NPI through no fault
of its own is a bottleneck.
That's partly because of work they have to, partly
because they're dependent on baggage handling,
which is not a government function.
You know, if you took, if you said no food fu would
considerably small, um, they still have to run assurance.
I think that you and that
and that's one of those trade offs.
Interesting. It's good to hear that
Questions.
That's good too. Alright,
well thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Appreciate you coming in
and appreciate your with uh, this afternoon's.
Sorry we mucked up your time To hear that.
Thank you so much. Thank you Bruce.
Thank was, have a good Christmas. If we don't see you again,
you're fine.
Thank you guys.
Yeah. Tiana, we're uh, now ending the live sessions
and we'll move back into private session.